#xquerydoc 

Parses [xqDoc](http://xqdoc.org/source.html) style comments from your xquery and generates a set of API
level html documentation all implemented in pure XQuery v1.0.

The xquerydoc commandline uses [XML Calabash](http://xmlcalabash.com) (which ships with [Saxon](http://www.saxonica.com)) though 
as xquerydoc is implemented in pure XQuery v1.0 you may also invoke
from most XQuery processors (Saxon, MarkLogic, XQilla, eXist ...).


##Install for Commandline usage (Mac/Unix/Linux)

To use from the commandline you should run Makefile e.g.

```bash
make install
```

This will try to install calabash as well. You will need to make sure
calabash is on your system path.

##Install for Commandline usage (Windows)

TBA

##Install as XQuery library

xquerydoc can also be invoked directly from your own XQuery scripts
but for now you will have to take care of applying XSLT stylesheets to
the xqdoc markup. 

The following directories are needed for use when directly invoking
from XQuery.

* src/xquery: contains XQuery implementation
* src/lib: contains css/xslt/js used to transform to final html 

The entrypoint is contained in *src/xquery/xquerydoc.xq* module.

##Usage

There are two ways to use xquerydoc.

###Invoking xquerydoc from the commandline

The *bin/xquerydoc* script can be invoked from the commandline and
generate documentation from xquery containing xqdoc comments. 

To use provide xquerydoc with a directory containing xquery or single xquery file
and the directory you wish to place generated documentation.

```bash
xquerydoc {xquery dir} {output dir} {format}
```

Currently only the HTML format is supported but hoping soon we will be
able to generate other formats (like markdown, text, docbook, etc...).

The following example will process a directory containing xquery and
output documentation to another directory.

```bash
xquerydoc som/xquery/ output/api html
```

###Invoking xquerydoc from xquery

As xquerydoc is itself written in pure XQuery v1.0  you can invoke  directly
from your own xquery applications employing the *xqdoc:xqdoc()* function to extract xqDoc comments.

Whilst xquerydoc itself is written in XQuery v1.0, as a convenience we have provided XQuery processor specific 
implementations to apply stying.

####XQuery v1.0 Example (Saxon)
```xquery
xquery version "1.0" encoding "UTF-8";

import module namespace xqdoc="http://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc" at "/xquery/xquerydoc.xq";

xqdoc:xqdoc(fn:collection('/some/xquery/?select=file.xqy;unparsed=yes')) 
```
Note that we are using SAXON convention with collection to bring in
unparsed xquery file.

As with the commandline version we provide for your convenience a
MarkLogic version (though the XQuery v1.0 should also run within
MarkLogic just as well). 

###Invoking xquerydoc with MarkLogic

In addition we provide a MarkLogic variant of this script which will
connect to MarkLogic server (via XDBC) and invoke the MarkLogic v1.0
xquerydoc and generate documentation. These can be found in the
*extras/marklogic* directory.

```
ml-xquerydoc /some/directory/containing/xquery/ /output/html/to/some/directory/
```

To use this variant you will need to setup MarkLogic XDBC server and
provide details in *extras/marklogic/config.xml* file.

Note that you do not need to use ml-xquerydoc to genreate
documentation from a set of 1.0-ml version scripts, xquerydoc will do
that for you. 

####MarkLogic Example
```xquery
xquery version "1.0-ml" encoding "UTF-8";

import module namespace xqdoc="http://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc" at "/xquery/ml-xquerydoc.xq";

xqdoc:xqdoc(xdmp:document-get('/path/to/xquery/file.xqy')) 
```

## xqDoc Markup

The following markup is what the xqdoc:xqdoc() function outputs.

```xml
<doc:xqdoc xmlns:doc="http://www.xqdoc.org/1.0">
  <doc:control>
    <!--Generated by xquerydoc: http://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc-->
    <doc:date/>
    <doc:version>N/A
    </doc:version>
  </doc:control>
  <doc:module type="main">
    <doc:uri/>
    <doc:comment>
      <doc:description>   This main module controls the
      presentation of the home page for  xqDoc.  The home page
      will list all of the library and main modules  contained in
      the 'xqDoc' collection.  The mainline function invokes only
      the  method to generate the HTML for the xqDoc home page.
      A parameter of type   xs:boolean is passed to indicate
      whether links on the page should be constructed   to static
      HTML pages (for off-line viewing) or to XQuery scripts for
dynamic  real-time viewing. 
      </doc:description>
      <doc:author> Darin McBeath
      </doc:author>
      <doc:since> June 9, 2006
      </doc:since>
      <doc:version> 1.3
      </doc:version>
    </doc:comment>
  </doc:module>
  <doc:variables/>
  <doc:functions/>
</doc:xqdoc>
```

Its relatively easy to then take this XML and style it using provided
XSLT stylesheets provided for under *src/lib*. The Marklogic variant
XQuery library provides this in a utility function contained in *src/xquery/ml-utils.xqy*.


## API Docs

Yup we eat our own dog chow, view API docs here.

https://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc/tree/master/docs/api


## Distro

xquerydoc

* bin: contains bash run scripts
* docs: contains api generated documentation
* ebnf: contains Extended Backus–Naur Form definitions of XQuery language

xquerydoc/src

* tests: contains tests
* lib: contains xslt and associated javascript, css, etc
* src: contains xquerydoc XQuery modules 

##Running Tests

To run all tests

```bash
bin/run-all-tests.sh
```
All this script does is run the following xquery processor specific scripts.

```bash
bin/run-saxon-tests.sh 
bin/run-marklogic-tests.sh
```

Test scripts work by invoking an XProc pipeline in *src/tests* (either saxon-test.xpl or marklogic-test.xpl).

To run MarkLogic tests you will need to setup XDBC server and edit
*src/tests/config.xml* with relevant details.

If you want to invoke these scripts manually please review the test
run scripts to understand what needs to be passed into Calabash.

##Credit, Acknowledgements

Created by John Snelson, James Fuller 

XQuery parsers were generated from EBNF using Gunther Rademacher
excellent http://www.bottlecaps.de/rex/

Norman Walsh's XML Calabash is [available](http://xmlcalabash.org) under either the GPLv2 or Sun's CDDL license 

[Saxon](http://www.saxonica.com) XQuery and XSLT 2.0 Processor by Michael Kay is released under Mozilla Public License

[Prettify](http://code.google.com/p/google-code-prettify/) (used by api doc and testsuite) is released under Apache License, Version 2.0

XQuery prettify 'brush' was provided by Patrick Wied (as part of a MarkLogic
bounty contest ;) ) and can be obtained [here](http://www.patrick-wied.at/static/xquery/prettify/) 

Though there is no reuse of any code from the  original xqDoc project,
we have opted to use a subset of the xqDoc XML format, the codebase is released under Apache License, Version 2.0


## License

xquerydoc is released under Apache License v2.0

Copyright 2011 John Snelson, James Fuller

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and

##FAQ

*Why a pure XQuery v1.0 implementation ?*

This means you can generate api level documentation using just XQuery
! Need we say more ?

*Why use XML Calabash XProc ?*

As we are applying an XQuery process and an XSLT process on a set of
xquery documents it seemed like a good match for the commandline
invokation. You can of course use the XQuery v1.0 libraries without
XProc but you will need to apply XSLT stylesheets using your
processors capabilities.

*How can I build xquerydoc ?*

The build process is not included in the distro currently.

*xquerydoc does not seem to parse correctly !*

We are very interested in parsing as correctly as possible so please
submit issue to https://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc/issues

*Doesn't work on windows!*

The commandline scripts have been written with unix/linux/osx in mind
but xquerydoc can be invoked by any XQuery v1.0 compliant processor.

As the commandline scripts are just a wrapper around an XProc pipeline
you should be able to easily work out invoking XML Calabash.

Otherwise very happy to review pull requests and patch any windows
support but I am not setup to test for this platform.

##More Info

https://github.com/xquery/xquerydoc


## Status

* add specific parsing options (XQueryv3.0, etc)
* add recursive directory processing
* create markdown output format
* create docbook output format
* create text output format
* enhance output


xquerydoc v.1 18/9/2011
